Ask you to explain what a pastiche is. Let me ask you the question, okay?
Dr. Crider, could you explain what a pastiche is and what problems come up with the Conan material in relation to one?
Well, in the sense that we've been talking about it, it's where one writer takes a character and a world like the Hyborian
age created by another writer and writes new stories with the same character and the same setting. And he gets the full
credit for the story, but the other writer has created the character and the historical setting. Also, De Camp did
something similar where he took incomplete Howard stories and changed them into Conan stories. which would be a
pastiche of a slightly different kind, but it's the same principle operating. And I'm not aware of any particular
problems that arose, except, of course, by him doing this, he would have to ensure that the estate received part of his
profits for him. Do you think that Conan is popular enough or Howard's work is so popular that perhaps we'll see an
endless stream of books, pastiches by all sorts of authors? It looks like. of people who have done or will be doing these.
And I don't know whether we've mentioned this, but there is a planned Conan movie with Arnold Schwarzenegger as Conan.
If this is a huge success, like Star Wars, let's say, that could give even more interest to this kind of thing. And we may
see Howard going on forever with these pastiches being I think it's possible that they would be continued because the
original idea was to fill out Conan's life, you know, have his life completely covered by the past issues from, I don't
know, his boyhood, but certainly all of his adult life when he was an old King Conan. And it's already gone beyond that.
They filled out his life and then they're going back to, you know, this stage in his life, he did such and such. So
certainly they're not going to stop with what would be the chronological life of Conan. So the potential to go on beyond
is there. You mentioned to fill in Conan's life. Where do we get information about Conan's life unless it's been written
in stories? Well, what they did was start with what Howard had written in his stories and say, if he were such and such an
age in this story, and then a little bit later, he was in this part of the country. And in Conan the Conqueror, it
mentions when he was a pirate and back in his pirate days, and that's part of the way he solves the crime and gets back the
magical stone. So they would say, well, we'll write a pastiche about the pirate days. So that's what I mean when I say they
filled out his life. That was the plan of Lancer Books, and that's what De Camp was trying to do. They were trying to
arrange the books in chronological order, and then De Camp and others were writing these stories to fill in the gaps in
his life. But if you look at the Lancer Books, I don't know how successful that was because they'll have One edition of it
will say number four in the complete Conan, and the next edition will say number five, and it'll be the same book. Well,
originally, though, the explanation for that, Bill, is that they
numbered them by date of publication. The first one published was number one, the second one published, and then they
came up with this idea of the chronological series and renumbered them all. That explains that. In other words, then,
the author of a pastiche... would be attempting to remain true to the character of Conan, to what we know of his life,
simply to fill in the details that Howard perhaps never got to. That's what I would expect. It's true that maybe some of
these writers have not necessarily been true to the character of Conan as developed by Howard. Of course, every writer
thinks that he's the one who's doing the true Conan stories. De Camp thinks his are the true Conan stories because he
doesn't have the violence overt. He doesn't spend a lot of time describing the gore. even though it's there, and because
he doesn't have a lot of sex in his, which Conan was practically asexual, really, even though he had a queen. And a son.
Didn't he have a son, too? This was in the pastiches, not that I would try. But then Andrew Offutt, I'm sure, thinks that his
is the true Conan, that he has Conan rape a girl, which Robert E. Howard would have probably but in Suicide earlier,
rather than write about rape, you know, this was not something that you would do. And Offutt has done pastiches of other
Howard characters. Solid frame, didn't he? I'm not sure. Didn't he do Bran Mak Morn? He did. For Zebra Books.
Could you tell us a little bit about this Hyborian age? Was this a created world of Howard? Was it an actual time in history
or was it totally imaginary?
I don't know if you could say it was totally imaginary, but it was not an actual age. It was a prehistoric age, so
everything to imagine about it could be possible. That's why I argued that the stirrups were not really necessarily an
anachronism. Maybe they had them and then after You know, they had to be rediscovered or something. But they have
actually done a map in trying to trace out the places, and they say it's amazing how well it fits over modern Europe. And so
he kind of used a European landscape. Also, he has written a lot about how fascinated he was by the Picts, this group of
native to the island of Britain that would fight the Roman soldiers. And he certainly tried to use some of the idea of the
Picts and the barbarians fighting the invading Romans who represented civilization. But basically it is imaginary.
Doesn't he also take in some of his stories, I think the King Kull series, back to the Atlantis or the Atlantean
civilization? I think so. It would be the King Kull stories. I don't know whether those have been republished recently
or not. I know Lancer did some of those, but I haven't seen any of those in so long. I'm not sure. How many Conan stories did
he write that were published in his lifetime? Originals. Was it just a couple dozen? The only full-length book was Conan
the Conqueror, and of course it was done serially, but I would say probably not more than a dozen. Somehow I'd get the
number 18. Okay, now that might be 18 counting Conan the Conqueror, serials, something like that. Published ones.
Right.
The Bran Mak Morn series, I think he was the one who dealt with the Celtic environment, the Celtic heroes.
Did he publish those in Weird Tales also? I don't know. I'm sure there's probably where, though, or else. Where else
would they fit? Yeah, okay, okay.
We could, I'd like, before we, you know, we'd like to say some more specifics, if we can, a little bit about his work. I
think we've probably got enough on his life, do you think? Okay, I'm going to start talking maybe about the Conan heroes,
just some general comments about his writing, try to get some things, you know. Make them to that thing. What? Make them
into this thing, right? Oh, I will, yeah, yeah.
It's been remarked by many people that every hero that Conan wrote about, and of course... Back out of the mood again.
It's been said that every hero that Howard created for his pulp material was similar. They were all of the same type,
whether it was a Western hero, whether it was Conan, whether it was King Kull back in the days of Atlantis. They all seemed
to be of a type. And we remarked earlier that Howard seems to have put himself into those characters. Do you think other
people are fascinated by this type of character? What draws readers, or what did draw them and still draws them to this
kind of hero? Dr. Crider, do you think you have any? Well, let's talk about men. I often wonder... if women read the Conan
stories with any enjoyment, they might have to for research purposes, like Dr. Laughlin, but we might ask her whether
she enjoys them, but this is the perfect male fantasy figure, the lone hero, with his sword, or maybe in a Western story,
his pistol. I'm sure that the psychological critics can make a great deal out of this. And virtually irresistible to
women, but who nevertheless doesn't need the company of women because he's self-sufficient, he's strong, he can
overcome nearly anything. And this hero fits in the westerns. I think of one of my favorite western characters,
Randolph Scott, from years gone by, who almost always played the lone hero, seldom if ever had a love story in his western
movie. I think he's a great fantasy figure that probably has a powerful appeal for men. Now, I'm not sure how much appeal
you'd have for a woman. And maybe even, I probably shouldn't say this, but maybe even a sort of adolescent fantasy
figure. And I can particularly see adolescents enjoying this kind of figure. That's when you go, or at least a lot of
people, who go through that phase of feeling. outcast or different, and a fantasy figure like this would really give
somebody like this something to enjoy. Let Dr. Laughlin say what women might think about Conan. Well, the point of being
self-sufficient, I think that can appeal to anyone. Sometime or another, everyone wants to be self-sufficient. But
whether or not women can really identify with Conan as an example of self-sufficiency is another matter. I must say I
don't particularly enjoy reading Conan. As I said, the character does not appeal to me greatly. I like the magical
elements. I like the mean old whatever he was, the sorcerer who brought him back to life with the magic stone. The one that
was brought back to life. Xaltotun, I think. Yeah, Xaltotun. I liked him better than I liked Conan. You know, the scary
creatures, the Stephen King type hocus pocus. I don't find Conan very appealing. In fact, I do find the whole thing very
adolescent, even childish at times. Of course, then again, the target audience he was writing for at that time was that
audience. The pulp readers, the ones who went down and bought the pulp magazines off the newspaper rack were probably
mainly teenagers. Howard, of course, had a great, I'm not sure what word to use, admiration for, fascination with the
barbarian. Perhaps that's why Conan has been one of his most successful kind of heroes. Do you remember the story? I
think it was called The Witch Shall Be Born, the one where Conan was crucified. I think that's one of the most powerful
scenes in the Conan series, to get across the toughness. You know, Conan is crucified. You know, his legs, his arms are
nailed to the cross.
They pushed the cross over, and he tore himself out, was it, if I remember? Isn't that the one where he bites the vulture's
head off? Yeah, when he's crucified, the vulture comes and lands on him. You know, realizing he's going to die, and he
just bites the vulture's head off. Now that's tough. And what young man wouldn't love it? A taste of blood. No, just the
ultimate tough hero. Of course, I've read people who said they liked Solomon Kane as much as, if not more, than Conan. He
was a weird... sort of a hero. Wasn't he more of a... from Puritan England? He was a misplaced Puritan who roamed the world
over. Didn't most of his stories take place in Africa? And fighting African magic in a lot of those, I believe. But, you
know, these stories that we're talking about, all of them seem to me to have very little that, you know, of a woman's
element in And women in the story, just think about the character of women in the stories. They're just sort of there. And
when you need them maybe for a love scene or something. He really doesn't even have a love scene. He just, in Conan the
Conqueror, the woman is there just to get him out of prison because, as you said earlier, she found him irresistible when
she saw him out the window three years ago as he drove by in a parade. Which is, to take this up to more modern things, that's
exactly the way the James Bond movies work. All the women find him irresistible and get him out of trouble. Another
powerful adolescent fantasy figure.
Many people make a distinction between fantasy and science fiction, and Howard, of course, is maybe the pulp fantasy
writer par excellence, but he did write one science fiction book, or something that could be called science fiction,
Almuric. The hero was a Conan-type hero, but he was a modern man who was projected to another planet. Similar to the way
Burroughs did some of his heroes in the... Carson of Venus and, no, not Carson of Venus, similar to the way he did his hero John
Carter of Mars. But Howard didn't seem to think much of science fiction from what I've read. He thought that fantasy was a
more imaginative, more creative process, and of course this is what he was involved in. Do you think a reader can like,
appreciate the Howard-type fantasy and perhaps the hardcore science fiction at the same time? Or are they distinct,
distinct height, too distinct? The two things are distinct, the fantasy and the science fiction, but I think there are
some readers who can enjoy both. I do, and I think, I hate to think that I'm the only one. I like to read Larry Niven's
Ringworld, and I like to read Patricia McKillop's books about the harvest, and I like Robert E. Howard, and I like Peter
S. Beagle, The Last Unicorn, and I like Poul Anderson's Tall Zero. I can read any of that. I'm not sure that everybody is
that way. I think there are some readers who prefer fantasy, and there are some readers who prefer science fiction, just
as there are some who prefer hard science fiction. And I think that there's probably all sorts of in-group snobbism
involved in all of these things. The hard science fiction fan doesn't particularly think very much of those people who
like adventure type science fiction or maybe especially fantasy.
This is putting you on the spot, this question, but do you have any useful distinctions or definitions that would
separate the two, science fiction and fantasy? Well, it's not putting me on the spot since I've never read any two
definitions that agree.
My own distinction is that science fiction deals more with things that are probable and scientifically probable or at
least possible, whereas fantasy deals more with impossible things, non-existent, things I regard as impossible and
non-existent, such as the power of magic, lost races, and things of this nature. And while I enjoy reading about it, I
really don't think that that's within the realm of possibility, whereas I think space travel is. But that might be
putting me on bad ground. Somebody would say, well, faster than light travel is an impossibility. Is that fantasy or
science fiction? And I don't want to answer that. Would you say that Conan, the Conan work of Howard, would that be
typical sword and sorcery? Would that be a proper term for it? That's probably what I would call it. because there's
certainly plenty of sword play and there's plenty of sorcery involved in it. And others, some people make another
distinction of what's referred to as heroic fantasy, which I believe is more in the Tolkien vein than the Robert E.
Howard vein. Dr. Laughlin, hasn't De Camp written sword and sorcery type fantasy himself?
He writes fantasy. I don't know if he has written sword and sorcery fantasy distinct from the Conan books or not. His
fantasies generally don't involve swords, do they? He has. Books like The Tritonian Ring, for example, are what I would
classify as sword and sorcery. But they're different from the Conan stuff. They still have the humor in them. that
De Camp is noted for. And of course, De Camp has written straight historical novels,
like An Elephant for Aristotle, and Golden Wind, and things of that nature. But he's done other sword and sorcery
besides the Tritonian Ring, I'm sure, if I could just think of the titles. But to me, science fiction adventure is really
not that much different from fantasy because so many of them that are called science fiction adventure, it takes place
on another planet. Okay, it could just as easily have been taking place in a prehistoric time. They're getting you away
from the present to some imaginary world. Now, maybe their means of getting there are supposed to be more plausible than
the means of getting there would be in fantasy. But the actual plot and the adventures that take place do not seem to be
that much different to me. Because so you use magic, well, is that really different from astral projection?
Now, I guess the hardcore science fiction would be more plausible than fantasy, but a whole lot that goes under the title
of science fiction adventure to me isn't very distinct from fantasy. Well, there's a whole area in which you can't
separate the two. They blend together. David, I just had a few more isolated questions.
Dr. Laughlin, in your research, you've been tracking down people here in Brownwood and Cross Plains and all over the
place. What have they had to say about Howard and what was he like? Well, I've talked with Lindsey Tyson in Cross Plains
and Tevis Clyde Smith here in Brownwood and Jack Scott, who was the newspaper editor in Cross Plains. He was sent out as a
reporter to cover the suicide. He's the one who found the suicide note in the typewriter, the poem, which I can't quote
for you. It was sort of plagiarized from somebody else off, bled all done, pinned the curtain or something like that. His
friends, his close friends, are very defensive of him. As I said earlier, they keep saying he wasn't crazy. They
objected to the term schizoid. It's very painful for people like Lindsey Tyson to talk about it, perhaps because he
loaned the gun to him. It is very emotionally upsetting to him to talk about it in much detail. A great deal of guilt from
everyone in Cross Blanks who was alive at that time. He didn't fit in with the other people. People did think he was nutty,
and then he committed suicide, and I think a lot of people felt guilty, particularly a friend like Lindsey Tyson, and he
says he never mentioned suicide to me.
He was kind of considered a harmless kook, I think. But after he committed suicide, he did in a way transform that image in
their minds. He wanted to with his suicide, I think, to do something heroic.
He wanted to do something with suicide, something like that. Say that again. I think in his suicide, he wanted to do
something heroic that would transform him in the eyes of all the people around him. And to an extent, it worked. Because
instead of being a harmless kook, he became a tragic figure. He inflicted a great deal of guilt on all the people in the
area.
Most of the people remember him rather fondly. Some of the people do describe his relationship with his mother as
actually perverse.
They say his mother seemed to want him to commit suicide when she died. She saw this as an example of his devotion, nearly
like a woman taking Praise from a suitor, from a boyfriend, kind of, oh, you know, you couldn't really do that. But in the
same way she was trying to get him to, she saw it as very flattering that her son had this devotion to him. Didn't you say
that Tyson had helped Howard do some research on some of the things that he wrote? That was Smith. Tevis Clyde Smith.
Tevis Clyde Smith. Now, Lindsey Tyson never had anything to do with Robert's writing. He kept his life in compartments,
and Lindsey Tyson was in his compartment that didn't have anything to do with his intellectual life. He didn't share any
of his intellectual life with Lindsey Tyson. What type of research would Smith have done for Howard?
Well, he did the research for, I believe the title is Red Blades of Black Cathay. and I'm sure that it was simply historical
background. Now that's noted in that book from Zebra entitled The Book of Robert E. Howard. He didn't do much research
really. He just read a book or two. I don't think it's considered very accurate portrayal.
I understand that I read a reminiscence by E. Hoffman Price when he came to visit Howard and Cross Plains. I understand
that Howard whether this was true or not, thought he had enemies and he would carry a gun in his car. And Price was startled
one time. I think they were driving down the road and Howard slowed down into Bush and reached over and touched his gun and
said, you have to watch out. You know, I have enemies. What was this all about? Again, I think a whole lot of this was play
acting. Here was the fellow from California. He'd come out to see him, and I think he wanted to impress him with the Old
West image. I really think. But for Howard, his play acting and his life never were really clear cut. He may have
convinced himself of these things. He would work when he was working out with punching a punching bag, boxing. His
father would ask him, why are you doing this? And he would say, well, I used to have to take a lot off people, and they'd push
me around, and now I want to be able to push back. I want to be able to take care of myself. No one that I have talked with, and
I've gone back to his junior high days, not to his grade school days, but I, well, yes, I have. I talked with Andy Newton
Davis, who knew him when he was nine. No one can remember anybody ever picking on Robert. They can't remember him ever
having been involved in a scuffle in a schoolyard. This seems to have been completely in his imagination. And how much of
it was he just trying to impress E. Hoffman Price, and how much was he believed at him? Price believed it. The next
paragraph, after he related the episode, he said, and the man was not kidding me. I could tell he was serious. He was not
kidding that he believed there were enemies there or something. You said you've gone back and talked to some of his
teachers. In terms of formal education, how much did Howard have? Now, I did not talk with his teachers from grade
school. It was Annie Newton Davis, who was a neighbor, who was older than he was. She was about 22 when he was nine. He went
through Cross Plains, which had 10 grades. And at this time, high school had 11 grades. So he came to Brownwood High to
finish his senior year, to get the 11th year, which was a senior year then. And this was not at all uncommon. My great
uncles did the same thing. They lived in small communities, and they came into Brownwood, and they boarded in Brownwood
to finish that last year of high school. What was uncommon is that Howard's mother came with him. and kept house for him.
Most of the boys came and kind of lived in a dormitory-type situation in boarding houses and had a high time. My great
uncle said that he certainly did. Then he went back home to, Howard went back home to Cross Plains for a couple of years and
came back to Howard Payne to get a business certificate. It was a one-year program, and I believe it took him a year and a
half or something like that. He took bookkeeping, accounting, nothing in liberal arts, no literature history or
anything. Did he ever get a job that came out of such experience or such coursework? I believe he tried to get a job as a
bookkeeper and lasted about a week or two. He hated all of his employers. Again, that idea of lacking discipline, saying
that he couldn't stand anyone to be an authority over him. That's why he hated school, because he couldn't stand a
teacher having authority over him.
What in his, did Howard get out of Texas? Wasn't he out of state for a while in his travels? I read once where he was in New
Orleans for a few weeks or a brief period of time. Yes, his father went back to take some medical training and I think
something to do with eye problems. And so while his father was there for some medical training at Tulane, he lived there
when he was about 13 or 14. Did he see the ocean? Did he have any experience with the ocean that you know of? That's a strange
question, but he did write some of his pulp fiction on sailors and sailing. He did go to South Texas. He may have been
around the Gulf, because I know he did go to South Texas. I think he may have dipped into Mexico one time, too, but just like
for two or three days.
You've noted before, I think I would agree with this, that Howard's fiction seems to be wish fulfillment in a lot of
respects. Besides his close friends, didn't he have a lot of correspondence with other professional authors who were
writing for the same kinds of pulp magazines he did. Was that in any sense an attempt to see himself as part of a circle, a
group of like-minded men, friendship? For instance, Lovecraft. He had a lot of correspondence with him, I understand,
but never met him. How many, I mean, was this something that he needed? Was this something he...
you know sought out. I thought he needed it and Lovecraft needed it both. Neither one of them had very many close friends
where they lived and certainly there weren't very many people who sympathized with Robert's literary aspirations and
he felt accepted by these people. As I said earlier, Dr. Howard would send his baby pictures and his manuscripts to
people who had never met Robert but who had corresponded with him cordially and the father was so grateful for their pen
pal friendship with Robert, that he would give them things.
That might get into the whole psychology of fandom, though, and the way because science fiction fandom or fantasy
fandom now, the writers get together, the fans get together, and they support each other. And who else would there be in
cross planes for somebody to talk to? his literary aspirations. Yeah, you're probably going to have to cut this because
you have people cutting your throat, but I think fandom today is very adolescent. It seems like so many of the people, now
not all of them, we were there and we're not, we're mature, but so many of the people you see, you can tell by looking at
them, somehow they don't quite fit in anywhere else. They're not exactly winners. And so in this little circle, they're
a winner. Except for us. Except for us. I mean, I want to qualify that. You're right. I'll have to edit that out. Most of the
fans are losers. David, that's all I would have. I think we're, you know, myself.
Okay, well, listen, I appreciate it, Mr. Baum. Is this person related to you, your brother? Okay. About what time would
be the best time to call him, to reach him during the day?
Or in the evening, either one.
Mostly just about anything that you might know about Mr. Howard and what he was like living in Cross Plains, what it was
like.
Yes, sir.
Okay. Well, I'll try to get a hold of him then.
Okay.
Okay, I'll try and give him a call then.
Okay, yeah, I've got it.
You don't remember any stories about Mr. Howard and what he was like?
Listen,
I appreciate your time, Mr. Baum.
Yeah, mostly we're just looking for old stories about Mr. Howard, you know, what he was like, what he did in Cross Plains.
Okay, I'll try and give your brother a call tomorrow then.
Yeah. Oh, what you did was quite helpful. Yeah. Listen, I really appreciate it.
Yeah. Well, listen, we appreciate the information you did give us is tracking this thing down sort of like detective
work. And listen, we appreciate the information on your brother and we'll try and get in contact with him tomorrow.
Okay. Thank you very much, sir. And thank you for your time. Okay.